README.md, before:

# co-log

[![MPL-2.0 license](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MPL--2.0-blue.svg)](https://github.com/kowainik/co-log/blob/master/LICENSE)
[![Build status](https://img.shields.io/travis/kowainik/co-log.svg?logo=travis)](https://travis-ci.org/kowainik/co-log)
[![Windows build](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/github/kowainik/co-log?branch=master&svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/kowainik/co-log)

|                   |                                    |                                           |                                                       |
| :------------     | :--------------------------------- | :---------------------------------------- | :---------------------------------------------------- |
| `co-log-core`     | [![Hackage][hk-img-core]][hk-core] | [![Stackage LTS][lts-img-core]][lts-core] | [![Stackage Nightly][nightly-img-core]][nightly-core] |
| `co-log`          | [![Hackage][hk-img]][hk]           | [![Stackage LTS][lts-img]][lts]           | [![Stackage Nightly][nightly-img]][nightly]           |
| `co-log-polysemy` | [![Hackage][hk-img-ps]][hk-ps]     | [![Stackage LTS][lts-img-ps]][lts-ps]     | [![Stackage Nightly][nightly-img-ps]][nightly-ps]     |

`co-log` is a composable and configurable logging framework. The idea of the approach is
described in the following blog post:

* [co-log: Composable Contravariant Combinatorial Comonadic Configurable Convenient Logging](https://kowainik.github.io/posts/2018-09-25-co-log)

The repository contains the following packages:

* [`co-log-core`](co-log-core): lightweight package with basic data types and
  general idea.
* [`co-log`](co-log): taggless final implementation of logging library based on
  `co-log-core`.
* [`co-log-polysemy`](co-log-polysemy): implementation of logging library based
  on `co-log-core` and the [`polysemy`](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/polysemy) extensible effects library.
* [`co-log-benchmark`](co-log-benchmark): Benchmarks of the `co-log` library.

See the following tutorial series about the library:

* [Intro: Using `LogAction`](https://github.com/kowainik/co-log/blob/master/co-log/tutorials/1-intro/Intro.md)
* [Using custom monad that stores `LogAction` inside its environment](https://github.com/kowainik/co-log/blob/master/co-log/tutorials/2-custom/Custom.md)

`co-log` also cares about concurrent logging. For this purposes we have the `concurrent-playground`
executable where we experiment with different multithreading scenarios to test the library behavior.
You can find it here:

* [tutorials/Concurrent.hs](co-log/tutorials/Concurrent.hs)

## Benchmarks

`co-log` is compared with basic functions like `putStrLn`. Since IO overhead is
big enough, every benchmark dumps 10K messages to output. If benchmark name
doesn't contain `Message` then this benchmark simply dumps string `"message"`
to output, otherwise it works with `Message` data type from the `co-log`
library.

| Benchmarks                                              | Time for 10K messages |
| :------------------------------------------------------ | :-------------------- |
| `Prelude.putStrLn`                                      | `  5.117ms`           |
| `Text.putStrLn`                                         | `  9.220ms`           |
| `ByteString.putStrLn`                                   | `  2.971ms`           |
| `mempty`                                                | `  1.181ms`           |
| `logStringStdout`                                       | `  5.107ms`           |
| `logPrint`                                              | `  5.248ms`           |
| `logTextStdout`                                         | `  5.351ms`           |
| `logByteStringStdout`                                   | `  2.933ms`           |
| `logByteStringStderr`                                   | ` 17.482ms`           |
| `ByteString > (stdout <> stderr)`                       | ` 17.715ms`           |
| `Message > format > stdout`                             | `  9.188ms`           |
| `Message > format > ByteString > stdout`                | `  3.524ms`           |
| `Message{callstack} > format > stdout`                  | `  9.139ms`           |
| `Message{callstack:5} > format > stdout`                | `  9.464ms`           |
| `Message{callstack:50} > format > stdout`               | `  9.439ms`           |
| `Message{Time,ThreadId} > format > stdout`              | ` 54.160ms`           |
| `Message{Time,ThreadId} > format > ByteString > stdout` | ` 54.137ms`           |


[hk-img]: https://img.shields.io/hackage/v/co-log.svg?logo=haskell
[hk-img-ps]: https://img.shields.io/hackage/v/co-log-polysemy.svg?logo=haskell
[hk-img-core]: https://img.shields.io/hackage/v/co-log-core.svg?logo=haskell
[hk]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/co-log
[hk-ps]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/co-log-polysemy
[hk-core]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/co-log-core
[lts-img]: http://stackage.org/package/co-log/badge/lts
[lts-img-ps]: http://stackage.org/package/co-log-polysemy/badge/lts
[lts-img-core]: http://stackage.org/package/co-log-core/badge/lts
[lts]: http://stackage.org/lts/package/co-log
[lts-ps]: http://stackage.org/lts/package/co-log-polysemy
[lts-core]: http://stackage.org/lts/package/co-log-core
[nightly-img]: http://stackage.org/package/co-log/badge/nightly
[nightly-img-ps]: http://stackage.org/package/co-log-polysemy/badge/nightly
[nightly-img-core]: http://stackage.org/package/co-log-core/badge/nightly
[nightly]: http://stackage.org/nightly/package/co-log
[nightly-ps]: http://stackage.org/nightly/package/co-log-polysemy
[nightly-core]: http://stackage.org/nightly/package/co-log-core

Commit message:

[#162] Write more beginner-friendly README (#168)
* [#162] Write more beginner-friendly README

README.md, after:

# co-log

[![Build status](https://img.shields.io/travis/kowainik/co-log.svg?logo=travis)](https://travis-ci.org/kowainik/co-log)
[![Windows build](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/github/kowainik/co-log?branch=master&svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/kowainik/co-log)
[![MPL-2.0 license](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MPL--2.0-blue.svg)](https://github.com/kowainik/co-log/blob/master/LICENSE)

|                   |                                    |                                           |                                                       |
| :------------     | :--------------------------------- | :---------------------------------------- | :---------------------------------------------------- |
| `co-log-core`     | [![Hackage][hk-img-core]][hk-core] | [![Stackage LTS][lts-img-core]][lts-core] | [![Stackage Nightly][nightly-img-core]][nightly-core] |
| `co-log`          | [![Hackage][hk-img]][hk]           | [![Stackage LTS][lts-img]][lts]           | [![Stackage Nightly][nightly-img]][nightly]           |
| `co-log-polysemy` | [![Hackage][hk-img-ps]][hk-ps]     | [![Stackage LTS][lts-img-ps]][lts-ps]     | [![Stackage Nightly][nightly-img-ps]][nightly-ps]     |

`co-log` is a composable and configurable logging framework. It
combines all the benefits of Haskell idioms to provide a reasonable
and convenient interface. Though it uses some advanced concepts in its
core, we are striving to provide beginner-friendly API. The library
also contains complete documentation with a lot of beginner-friendly
examples, explanations and tutorials to guide users. The combination
of pragmatic approach to logging and fundamental Haskell abstractions
allows us to create highly composable and configurable logging
framework.

If you're interested in how different Haskel typeclasses are used to
implement core functions of `co-log`, you can read the following blog
post which goes in detail about internal implementation specifics:

* [co-log: Composable Contravariant Combinatorial Comonadic Configurable Convenient Logging](https://kowainik.github.io/posts/2018-09-25-co-log)

`co-log` is also modular on the level of packages. We care a lot about a
low dependency footprint so you can build your logging only on top of
the minimal required interface for your use-case. This repository contains
the following packages:

* [`co-log-core`](co-log-core): lightweight package with basic data types and
  general idea which depends only on `base`.
* [`co-log`](co-log): taggless final implementation of logging library based on
  `co-log-core`.
* [`co-log-polysemy`](co-log-polysemy): implementation of logging library based
  on `co-log-core` and the [`polysemy`](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/polysemy) extensible effects library.
* [`co-log-benchmark`](co-log-benchmark): Benchmarks of the `co-log` library.

To provide more user-friendly introduction to the library, we've
created the tutorial series which introduces the main concepts behind `co-log`
smoothly:

* [Intro: Using `LogAction`](https://github.com/kowainik/co-log/blob/master/co-log/tutorials/1-intro/Intro.md)
* [Using custom monad that stores `LogAction` inside its environment](https://github.com/kowainik/co-log/blob/master/co-log/tutorials/2-custom/Custom.md)

`co-log` also cares about concurrent logging. For this purposes we have the `concurrent-playground`
executable where we experiment with different multithreading scenarios to test the library behavior.
You can find it here:

* [tutorials/Concurrent.hs](co-log/tutorials/Concurrent.hs)

## Benchmarks

`co-log` is compared with basic functions like `putStrLn`. Since IO overhead is
big enough, every benchmark dumps 10K messages to output. If benchmark name
doesn't contain `Message` then this benchmark simply dumps string `"message"`
to output, otherwise it works with `Message` data type from the `co-log`
library.

To run benchmarks, use the following command:

```
cabal v2-run co-log-bench
```

| Benchmarks                                              | Time for 10K messages |
| :------------------------------------------------------ | :-------------------- |
| `Prelude.putStrLn`                                      | `  5.117ms`           |
| `Text.putStrLn`                                         | `  9.220ms`           |
| `ByteString.putStrLn`                                   | `  2.971ms`           |
| `mempty`                                                | `  1.181ms`           |
| `logStringStdout`                                       | `  5.107ms`           |
| `logPrint`                                              | `  5.248ms`           |
| `logTextStdout`                                         | `  5.351ms`           |
| `logByteStringStdout`                                   | `  2.933ms`           |
| `logByteStringStderr`                                   | ` 17.482ms`           |
| `ByteString > (stdout <> stderr)`                       | ` 17.715ms`           |
| `Message > format > stdout`                             | `  9.188ms`           |
| `Message > format > ByteString > stdout`                | `  3.524ms`           |
| `Message{callstack} > format > stdout`                  | `  9.139ms`           |
| `Message{callstack:5} > format > stdout`                | `  9.464ms`           |
| `Message{callstack:50} > format > stdout`               | `  9.439ms`           |
| `Message{Time,ThreadId} > format > stdout`              | ` 54.160ms`           |
| `Message{Time,ThreadId} > format > ByteString > stdout` | ` 54.137ms`           |


[hk-img]: https://img.shields.io/hackage/v/co-log.svg?logo=haskell
[hk-img-ps]: https://img.shields.io/hackage/v/co-log-polysemy.svg?logo=haskell
[hk-img-core]: https://img.shields.io/hackage/v/co-log-core.svg?logo=haskell
[hk]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/co-log
[hk-ps]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/co-log-polysemy
[hk-core]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/co-log-core
[lts-img]: http://stackage.org/package/co-log/badge/lts
[lts-img-ps]: http://stackage.org/package/co-log-polysemy/badge/lts
[lts-img-core]: http://stackage.org/package/co-log-core/badge/lts
[lts]: http://stackage.org/lts/package/co-log
[lts-ps]: http://stackage.org/lts/package/co-log-polysemy
[lts-core]: http://stackage.org/lts/package/co-log-core
[nightly-img]: http://stackage.org/package/co-log/badge/nightly
[nightly-img-ps]: http://stackage.org/package/co-log-polysemy/badge/nightly
[nightly-img-core]: http://stackage.org/package/co-log-core/badge/nightly
[nightly]: http://stackage.org/nightly/package/co-log
[nightly-ps]: http://stackage.org/nightly/package/co-log-polysemy
[nightly-core]: http://stackage.org/nightly/package/co-log-core
